---
layout: default
title: 2. Up and down the level of abstraction
parent: Distributed systems for fun and profit
nav_order: 2
---
# Chapter 2: Up and down the level of abstraction
## A system model
* enumerates the many assumptions associated with a particular stystem design
  - what capabilities the nodes have and how they may fail
  - how communication links operate and how they may fail and
  - properties of the overall system, such as assumptions about time and order

### Nodes in our system model
* Nodes have
  - the ability to execute a program
  - the ability to store data into volatile memory (which can be lost upon failure) and into stable state (which can be read after a failure)
  - a clock (which may or may not be assumed to be accurate)
  - the ability to send and receive messages

* failure models
  - crash-recovery: nodes fail by crashing and can recover after crashing; most common in real world
  - Byzantine fault: nodes can fail by misbehaving in any arbitrary way; rarely handled in real world due to compexity

### Communication links in our system model
* Communication links
  - connect individual nodes by allowing messages to be sent

* Common assumptions
  - individual links between each pair of nodes
  - FIFO
  - only deliver messages that were sent, which can be lost or delayed indefinitely
  - some real world systems assume network is reliable

* network partition is different from node failure

### Timing / ordering assumptions
* Synchronous vs asynchronous system model
  - Synchronous systems are analytically easier but unrealistic due to network failures/delay

## Two impossibility results
* The consensus problem:
  - Termination: Eventually, every correct process decides some value.
  - Agreement: Every correct process must agree on the same value.
  - Validity(Integrity):
    - (a stronger def.) If all correct processes propose the same value V, then any correct process must decide V.
    - (a weaker def.) Every correct process decides at most one value, and if it decides some value, then it must have been proposed by some process.

### FLP
* assumptions
  - asynchronous system model
  - nodes only fail by crashing
  - network is reliable
  - no bounds on message delay
* the result
  - There does not exist a (deterministic) algorithm for the consensus problem in an asynchronous system subject to failures, even if messages can never be lost, at most one process may fail, and it can only fail by crashing (stopping executing)
* implications
  - Asynchronous system model leads to a tradeoff: algorithms that solve the consensus problem must either give up safety or liveness when the guarantees regarding bounds on message delivery do not hold.

### CAP
* description in [Concepts](https://tbarantr.github.io/Note440/concepts/cap.html)
* the conclusions
  - many system designs used in early distributed relational database systems did not take into account partition tolerance (e.g. they were CA designs).
  - there is a tension between strong consistency and high availability during network partitions.
  - there is a tension between strong consistency and performance in normal operation.
  - if we do not want to give up availability during a network partition, then we need to explore whether consistency models other than strong consistency are workable for our purposes.


## Consistency models
Consistency model is a contract between programmer and system.

### Strong consistency
* linearizable consistency: all operations appear to have executed atomically in an order that is consistent with the global real-time ordering of operations.
* Sequential consistency: all operations appear to have executed atomically in some order that is consistent with the order seen at individual nodes and that is equal at all nodes.
From the perspective of a client interacting with a node, the two are equivalent.

### Weak consistency
* Client-centric consistency models: involve the notion of a client or session in some way. Old data is possible but no anomalies.
* Eventual consistency: if updates are stopped, then after some undefined amount of time all replicas will agree on the same value
